## Chapter One: Introduction {.page_break_before}

**Abstract**
Lung cancer remains a threat to human health throughout the world. Due to the accumulation of mutations from tobacco or otherwise, lung cancers have a vast mutational spectrum that affects many genes. These characteristics make lung cancer a challenge in understanding how the disease forms. Furthermore, mutational tumor heterogeneity is linked to drug resistance and a poor prognosis for patients. Interestingly, MAPK pathway activation appears to be a prerequisite for lung adenocarcinoma formation. In chapter 1, using genetically engineered mouse models of BRAF^V600E^ lung tumorigenesis, we analyzed the contribution of commonly mutated genes to tumor progression. It was found that, while BRAF^V600E^ drives benign tumor formation, loss of SETD2 function drives tumor progression to larger tumors. Thus, we identified SETD2 as a common alteration in BRAF^V600E^ lung cancer and is a bone fide tumor suppressor.

  Genetic sequencing of human lung adenocarcinomas has also revealed the widespread inactivation of p53 as a common alteration in late-stage lung adenocarcinoma. Normal p53 function restricts tumor plasticity, and thus losing p53 function enables tumor cells to adopt more malignant cell identities. However, not all p53 mutations are created equal. In chapter 2, we characterized the effect of three p53 mutant alleles (P53^fl/fl^, P53^R172H^, and p53^R245W^) on BRAF^V600E^ lung tumorigenesis. It was found that p53^R172H^ and p53^R245W^ induce more widespread tumor dedifferentiation, thus leading to worst tumor outcomes compared to p53-loss. Cell lines derived from the tumors allowed for the dissection of signaling pathway dynamics, which led us to observe higher MAPK pathway activation in p53^R172H^ and p53^R245W^ cell lines. We also found that p53^R172H^ and p53^R245W^ cell lines were more refractory to MAPK pathway inhibition with small molecule inhibitors. These altered phenotypes seen in p53^R172H^ and p53^R245W^ are likely a reflection of their altered transcriptomic profiles. 
  
  Although genetically-engineered mouse models are foundational in understanding how lung adenocarcinomas develop, progress, and metastasize, little is known about the transcriptional heterogeneity of genetically-engineered mice. In Chapter 3, we profiled the single-cell transcriptomes of BRAF^V600E^ lung tumors. We identified distinct clusters of tumor cell types and determined the transcriptional response to MAPK pathway-targeted therapy.
  
 By quantifying the tumor-suppressive landscape and the heterogeneous transcriptional landscape of BRAF^V600E^ cells, our work has contributed valuable knowledge to lung adenocarcinoma biology.
  




**NSCLC** Lung cancer is a global hazard to human health. The historical consumption of cigarette smoke has caused lung cancer to be the most common and deadly form of cancer. Fortunately, smoking rates have decreased in the past 30 years, with lung cancer rates also declining. However, even if cigarette consumption is eradicated, lung cancer would still significantly affect human health. Indeed, approximately 25% of all lung cancer cases arise in never smokers [@pmid:23714547]. Secondary causes of lung cancer include Radon exposure, high-heat cooking, family history, and air pollution [@pmid:27174888]. An individual's risk of lung cancer also increases with age due to decreases in the efficiency of tumor-suppressive mechanisms such as tumor immunity and apoptosis[@pmid:22974775].

Lung cancer can be broadly classified into two major histological categories based on how the malignant cells look under a microscope: Non-small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) and Small Cell Lung Cancer (SCLC). Within NSCLC, tumors are further characterized based on histological structures, anatomical location, cell-of-origin, and genetic drivers[@pmid:18815398]. For example, lung adenocarcinoma is the most common subtype and is characterized by glandular and papillary structures, while squamous cell lung carcinoma is characterized by keratin-pearls[@pmid:15059877]. Moreover, adenocarcinomas arise from alveolar-type-2 (AT2) cells in the distal lung and alveoli and are typified by genomic alterations throughout the MAPK pathway, such as EGFR, KRAS, BRAF, PI3K [@pmid:32747478; @pmid:11751630]. On the other hand, squamous cells carcinomas likely arise from basal cells and typically harbor SOX2 gene amplification [@pmid:27308419; @pmid:30332632].

The 5-year survival rate for patients with lung cancer was 25% in 2020 but varied depending on the stage of disease at the time of diagnosis [@doi:10.3322/caac.21654]. Like other solid cancers, lung cancers are most deadly after primary tumors have metastasized to other organ systems like the liver, kidney, bone, or nervous system [@pmid:5130083]. Lung cancer patients with no local or distant metastasis typically have a 5-year survival percentage of approximately 40% compared to approximately 5% with distant metastasis[@pmid:27535389; @pmid:27740970]. Ultimately, the cause of death of many lung cancer patients includes primary lung tumor burden, infection, pulmonary embolism or hemorrhage, or complications of metastatic dissemination[@pmid:23194048]. Although patient survival has improved due to improved targeted and immune therapies, the still poor prognosis reflects a need to understand better the molecular mechanisms underlying lung adenocarcinoma initiation, progression, maintenance, and response to targeted- or immune therapy.

The current standard of care for Lung adenocarcinoma patients is often a combination of several conventional chemotherapeutics, including Cisplatin, Carboplatin, Paclitaxel, or Pemetrexed[@pmid:32548736]. Fortunately, patients who have been identified to have EGFR, ALK, ROS, TRK, or BRAF genetic alternations are often offered pathway-targeted therapies[@pmid:27283860; @pmid:24651011]. As of late, many patients receive immunotherapy first, followed by pathway-targeted therapy after progression on immunotherapy. Furthermore, in the last seven years, exciting therapeutic options for _KRAS_ mutant lung cancer have been developed and tested, such as a combination of MEK-inhibition and autophagy-inhibition and direct inhibitors of _KRAS_ G12c and _KRAS_ G12D [@pmid:30833748; @pmid:35267628; @pmid:35167298]

**MAPK signaling** standard activation from the top of the MAPK pathway begins with extracellular ligands (EGF, NGF) binding to Receptor-Tyrosine Kinases (RTKs), leading to loading of RAS with GTP, which activates RAS. Many RAS mutations lead to either more efficient loading of GTP or less efficient GTP hydrolysis, which both serve to activate RAS. GTP-loaded RAS recruits and activates RAF kinases (ARAF, BRAF, CRAF) which then phosphorylates and activates MEK1/2 kinases, which then phosphorylates and activates ERK1/2. Ultimately, this leads to the activation of a suite of cellular processes required for proliferation, differentiation, migration, and cell survival. Therefore, activating mutation in this pathway, from RTKs to kinases, keeps the pathway in a constitutively active state. For example, the most common mutation in _BRAF_ is V600E. This valine to glutamic acid substitution is located in the kinase domain and mimics phosphorylation, allowing BRAF(V600E) to become independent of upstream regulations like RAS. This active state drives many of the cancer hallmarks required for tumor formation. It is important to note that oncogenic activation of the MAPK pathway differs from normal ligand-mediated pathway activation. For example, mitogens, such as EGF only transiently activate the pathway even with constant ligand stimulation. Various biological processes integrate this immediate and intense spike in pathway activation in the cell, resulting in specific target genes' transcription. In contrast, oncogenic signaling thru mutational activation of BRAF(V600E) results in constant kinase signaling that is integrated differently than normal pathway stimulation. Thus, an oncogene-specific transcriptional program is activated.

The importance of this pathway is reflected in the strong anti-tumor responses that are seen when small molecule inhibitors are used to target various molecules involved in the MAPK pathway. For example, Dabrafenib and Trametinib, inhibitors of BRAF and MEK kinases, respectfully, are used in patients that harbor BRAF(V600E) melanomas and lung cancers[@pmid:34455067; @pmid:25399551]. Although there is strong preclinical and clinical evidence that BRAF+MEK blockade can lead to tumor regression, not all patients respond to treatment[@pmid:35033867]. Therefore, multiple pathways need to be targeted to see a complete response, such as PI3Kor autophagy [@pmid:25472943; @pmid:32933997; @pmid:30833748].


Great effort has elucidated the proto-oncogenes that drive cancer formation when mutated, such as _MYC_, _RAS_, _PI3K_, and others. Nevertheless, we still do not fully understand the mechanistic details that determine how genes cooperate to drive cancer.

**Genetically engineered mouse models** Genetically-Engineered mouse models (GEMMs) of human cancer have allowed for the reproducible analysis of cancer biology driven by specific mutations frequently found in cancer patients. These models are helpful in understanding the molecular mechanisms that drive tumor formation and testing tumor responses to targeted or immune therapies. Early mouse models were not engineered but instead selected inbred mouse strains that were natural hosts of tumor transplantation[@pmid:692142]. However, these models suffer from long latencies, incomplete penetrance, and are often not genetically similar to human cancers. Therefore, carcinogen-induced models such as UV, Urethane, radiation, cigarette consumption, or MNU treatment models were developed to resemble carcinogen-induced human cancers[@pmid:7987394; @pmid:25363767]. After techniques were developed to genetically manipulate embryonic stem cells came the ability to engineer mice with specific mutations that could drive tumor formation. Since genes involved in cancer are also crucial for normal mouse development, conditional gene manipulation was developed to allow for temporal control.

The most commonly used conditional gene expression system relies on inducible transcription factors, such as the tetracycline-dependent regulatory system, where the treatment of mice with doxycycline toggles gene transcription levels of transgenes. More recently, Cre-lox recombination strategies have been utilized to get more cell-type-specific control. In this system, genes of interest are constructed to contain LoxP-sites that flank a particular genetic element. Upon delivery of Cre-recombinase, the DNA sequence in between LoxP sites is excised. With this approach, one can knock out a gene by engineering LoxP sites around critical exons or induce gene transcription by flanking a strong stop signal such as a polyadenylation sequence upstream of a gene-of-interest sequence such as KRAS(G12D)[@pmid:11751630].

Genetically engineered mouse models of human cancer are important preclinical models because they resemble the physiological environment of tumor growth in which tumors arise as progeny from a single initiating cell. These tumors can approximate the genetic alterations, transcriptional landscape, histology, and responsive disposition or lack, therefore, seen in human cancers(cite). However, these models often take months to develop tumors, and compound genetic alterations take time to develop. Later in this thesis, we will utilize TUBA-SEQ to both quantify tumor burden and cooperation of BRAF(V600E) with other common alterations in lung cancer.

Due to the robust connection between lung adenocarcinomas and mutational activation of genes involved in the MAPK-pathway, such as _EGFR_, _KRAS_, and _BRAF_,  many labs have generated genetically-engineered mouse models (GEMMs) that harbor conditionally-activated cancer-specific mutant alleles of either  EGFR (L858R), KRAS (G12D), or BRAF(V600E).

Our lab has previously developed a conditional mouse model of BRAF (V600E) human lung cancers[@pmid:17299132; @pmid:26001956; @pmid:31452510]. In the _Braf(CAT)_ model, normal BRAF is expressed from a conditional allele prior to Cre-mediated recombination. LoxP sites flank human _BRAF_ cDNA encoding normal _BRAF_ exons 15-18. Downstream of the LoxP sites is the mutant exon 15 that encodes the murine equivalent of the T1799A mutation that gives rise to the BRAF (V600E) oncoprotein. Downstream of the mutant exon, there is a P2A element and a CAAX-tagged _TdTomato_. Therefore, after Cre-mediated recombination, the BRAF (V600E) oncoprotein and fluorophore TdTomato are expressed at normal levels[@pmid:31452510].

**BRAF (V600E) Tumorigenesis and Cooperating Events for Progression**  Mutational activation of the MAPK pathway forms lung tumors in mice. Specifically, expression of BRAF (V600E) in the Surfactant-Protein C expression cells (alveolar type 2 pneumocytes) elicits benign tumor formation that fails to progress to lung adenocarcinoma. It is hypothesized that the cell cycle arrest is dependent on the tumor suppressors P53 and CDKN2A. Loss of either P53 or CDKN2A allows tumors to progress to malignant and deadly lung adenocarcinoma. Also, activating WNT signaling and PI3K signaling also allows BRAF (V600E) adenomas to progress to adenocarcinoma [@pmid:31452510; @pmid:26567140; @pmid:24589553]. These observations are in concordance with the &quot;multiple-hit&quot; hypothesis that states that cancers do not arise from single mutagenic events but are the consequence of sequential assaults on the genome that activate more than one oncogenic pathway. These multiple genetic hits allow cells to adopt traits to form cancer, which Bob Weinberg and Douglas Hanahan coined as the &quot;Hallmarks of Cancer&quot; [@pmid:21376230; @pmid:35022204]. The traits include suppression of apoptosis, active proliferation, altered metabolism, changes in cell identity, and forming blood vessels to supply tumor cells with adequate resources for growth[@pmid:35022204]. BRAF(V600E) expression alone is sufficient to activate many of the hallmarks of cancer, but additional pathways need to be activated or suppressed to develop into malignant tumors. Great effort has elucidated the proto-oncogenes that drive cancer formation when mutated, such as _MYC_, _RAS_, _PI3K_, and others. Yet we still do not fully understand the mechanistic details that determine how genes cooperate to override tumor suppressive mechanisms and drive cancer progression.


**Talk here about the prevalence of mutations in the egfr-ras-RAF-mek-erk pathway**

**Identification of this pathway as central to luad tumorigenesis**

**Development of gemms to study BRAF^V600E^**

**Proliferation arrest by this model**

**How does p53 loss lead to sustained wnt-signalling? Do dominant-negative recapitulate?**


**P53- mediated tumor suppression**
Cancers pose an evolutionary challenge for organisms regardless of their life span. Therefore, suppression of the outgrowth of neoplastic cells is built into many organisms. One such mechanism is the engagement of the p53 pathway. At the time of writing this dissertation, there are approximately 105,000 manuscripts on PUBMED that mention P53. P53 is well studied because of its prominent role in tumor suppression and because it is the most frequently altered gene in human cancer.

The p53 protein was initially discovered as a protein that bound large T antigene of the SV40 virus in infected cells [@pmid:222475].P53 is a transcriptional factor with a DNA-binding domain that has a DNA-binding domain recognizes explicitly two decameric half-sites. P53 also contains two N-terminal transactivation domains and a C-terminal oligomerization domain critical for P53-target gene activation[@pmid:16575405]. Central to the ability of P53 to induce transcriptional activation is tetramerization. Thus, if one or more P53 protein in the complex is compromised in transactivation or DNA binding, transcriptional activity is compromised. Therefore, if one copy of P53 is mutated, the organism's ability to suppress tumor formation is compromised.

The importance of p53 is best demonstrated in people and in mice that have just one mutated copy of P53. Humans with the familial- inherited Li-Fraumeni syndrome, in which they have one or more mutations in p53, are almost certain to develop cancer early on and throughout their life[@pmid:3409256]. Similarly, mice lacking two function P53 genes are prone to leukemias and lymphomas and have a shortened lifespan due to cancer incidence[@pmid:1552940]. On the other hand, organisms such as the African and Asian elephants, which have an abnormally low level of cancer incidence, have been shown to have higher multiple copies of _TP53_ in their genomes[@pmid:26447779]. 

The most well-known cellular functions of P53 include its ability to induce cell-cycle arrest in response to DNA damage[@pmid:8242752]. Many stress signals, including oncogene activation, have been shown to stimulate a reversible or irreversible cell cycle arrest[@pmid:9765202; @pmid:34812139]. However, the strength of P53 induced cell cycle arrest or apoptosis is likely cell type- and cellular stress-specific and is an active area of p53 research.

Once a cell encounters a stressor such as DNA damage or oncogene activation, P53 is stabilized and accumulates in the nucleus to activate a suite of target genes that can lead to several cellular phenotypes, such as cell-cycle arrest or apoptosis.

P53 was initially thought to be an oncogene as P53 is accumulated in lung cancer, which is not common in normal tissues[@pmid:1969059; @pmid:1694291]. Moreover, ectopic expression of a P53 cDNA was found to aid in transforming primary cells induced by RAS. However, early studies erroneously used mutated P53 instead of wild-type, leading to the misclassification of P53 as an oncogene. We now know P53 suppresses cell growth and transformation[@pmid:19776744].

Oftentimes, P53 is mutated in the DNA-binding domain at sites commonly referred to as &quot;hotspots&quot; due to their extraordinary frequency. These hotspot mutations poison the ability of p53 to bind DNA, therefore, blocking its function. Interestingly, since one mutated P53 can disrupt the entire P53 tetramer complex, a single mutation can exert dominant-negative effects by inhibiting the normal tumor-suppressive functions of P53. Although one mutant P53 allele is enough to compromise transcriptional activity, there is still selective pressure to lose the other wild-type copy. Loss of hemizygosity implies there is still residual tumor suppression in the presence of a wild-type P53 allele[@pmid:27585860].

Early on in P53 studies, there were reports of specific P53 mutations having a &quot;gain-of-function&quot; (GOF) effect. For example, Li-Fraumeni patients with specific missense mutations in P53 would develop tumors earlier than Li-Fraumeni patients with loss-of-function (LOF) mutations [@pmid:18511570]. Furthermore, experimental cell biology studies would express mutant-p53 in P53^null^ cells and demonstrate enhanced tumorigenic potential [@pmid:32404993]. Further evidence for GOF mutant-P53 in mice indicated that missense mutant P53 induced different cancer types and enhanced metastasis than LOF P53 [@pmid:15607980]. Furthermore, many groups have shown that mutant-p53 can alter signal transduction affecting chemoresistance and metabolism.

The cellular mechanisms that GOF P53 is involved in are also well-characterized but context-dependent. For example, in Pancreatic cancers driven by KRAS(G12D), Mutant P3 interacts with CREB to induce FOXA1 transcription, which enhances Beta-Catenin signaling to augment liver metastasis [@pmid:33839689].

