## Chapter Two: Quantitative tumor burden and small library screen using TUBA-SEQ 
{.page_break_before}

##Abstract
Large-scale sequencing of cancers has revealed that lung adenocarcinomas have a high mutation rate. Although it is clear that the evolution of lung adenocarcinoma is centered around mutational activation of the EGFR-RAS-RAF-MEK-ERK pathway, little is known about secondary mutations that drive disease progression. Since lung cancers are riddled with mutations, it is challenging to glean which mutations support cancer growth and which are merely bystanders. Therefore, pre-clinical mouse models that are syngenetic are essential to determining the oncogenicity of a particular gene. Here, we use Tuba-Sequencing combined with CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing to simultaneously determine the contribution of the loss of one of eleven tumor suppressor genes in BRAF^V600E^ mouse lung tumorigenesis. We show that loss of either _Apc_ or _Setd2_ leads to enhanced tumor growth. We validated SETD2 loss as a cooperating mutation with single-guide RNAs. Functionality, SETD2 is a histone lysine methyltransferase that marks active gene bodies by depositing me^3^ marks on H3K36. In BRAF^V600E^ lung tumors,  _Setd2_ loss decreases H3K36me^3^ and H3K36me^3^ was correlated with larger tumors. _SETD2_ RNA is expressed less in human lung cancers than in normal lungs and can indicate worse overall survival. Moreover, _SETD2_ loss is common in human _BRAF^V600E^_ lung adenocarcinomas. Together, our results highlight the potential importance of _SETD2_ in the progression of BRAF^V600E^ lung adenocarcinoma.

# Introduction

Next-generation sequencing has allowed for the unbiased identification of mutated genes in human cancer [@pmid:25079552; @pmid:25109877; @pmid:24132290].
The wealth of knowledge gained from such large-scale sequencing projects has revealed actionable mutations that can be targeted with small molecule inhibitors, such as dabrafenib and trametinib.
However, identifying possible targets is not enough, as many cancers with similarly mutated oncogenes, such as BRAF^V600E^, respond differentially to BRAF^V600E^-targeted therapy.
For example,  melanoma patients with BRAF^V600E^ mutations respond well to BRAF^V600E^-targeted therapy, whereas colorectal cancer patients with BRAF^V600E^ mutations do not respond[@pmid:22448344].
The disconnect between putative driver oncogenes identified in human cancers and response to targeted therapy is a problem that can be solved with rigorous pre-clinical experimentation, such as in GEMMs. 

Genomic sequencing of human tumors has also been a crucial insight into how cancers form and what signaling nodes might be necessary for progressive stages of cancer evolution.
For example, pancreatic cancers have a stereotypical histological progression brought about by known mutational activation.
Specifically, mutations in _KRAS_ initiate tumorigenesis, and loss of _TP53_ function and _SMAD3_ are associated with cancer progression[@pmid:31395068].
However, this is more difficult to do in lung adenocarcinoma because of the high mutational burden often due to the consumption of cigarettes[@pmid:27811275; @pmid:31996850].


Indeed, in highly mutated cancers such as melanoma and lung cancer, recurrent mutations are not necessarily predictive of biological importance.
To better understand the importance of candidate tumor suppressors or oncogenes, researchers exploit tumor cell lines and GEMMs to identify bona-fide genetic drivers of cancer.
However, these systems are suboptimal, as they are either not physiologically relevant (tissue culture) or are not scalable to determine the effect of many mutations (GEMMs).
Moreover, techniques to measure the cooperation of genes to drive lung cancer are qualitative and are not sufficiently quantitative to allow for large-scale studies.
Typically, lung adenocarcinoma is quantified by lung weight or histological analyses such as tumor burden (Percentage of the lung that is tumor), tumor size, and immunohistochemistry (IHC) of tumor markers.
Although essential and informative, these analyses are not high-throughput and rely on many mice to achieve statistical confidence. Furthermore, there is intrinsic bias when calculating tumor size and tumor burden, as tissue-sectioning results in tumor sections that do not accurately portray actual tumor size. Therefore, more advanced techniques are required for large-scale analysis of mouse tumors that are both quantitative and high throughput.

Recently, Monte Winslow and his lab at Stanford University have developed **Tu**mor- **Ba**rcode **Seq**uencing (Tuba-Seq), a rapid, multiplexed, quantitative assay for analyzing the contribution of tumor-suppressor loss _in vivo_.
This technique delivers a uniquely barcoded lentiviral encoding Cre recombinase to activate Cre-mediated oncogenes and a guide RNA to inactivate a single tumor suppressor gene.
Therefore, each tumor will be driven by the same oncogene but with different tumor suppressors inactivated.
After some time (6-24 weeks), tissue is harvested for whole-lung DNA extraction, and targeted DNA-sequencing is performed to quantify relative tumor size to spike-in controls[@pmid:28530655].
Therefore, the contribution of a single tumor suppressor can be quantified in a single animal. 

BRAF^V600E^ has previously been shown to be a potent driver of lung tumorigenesis[@pmid:17299132].
However, tumors fail to progress past adenoma-like tumors.
Given the theory that BRAF-^V600E^ induces growth arrest after an initial burst of neoplastic growth, it would be of interest to know if all tumors grow to a predetermined and absolute size or if there is a spectrum of tumor sizes that are determined by extrinsic factors such as proximity to blood vessels or specific stromal cells.
Therefore, we used Tuba-Seq combined with CRISPR/CAS9 genome editing to explore the contribution of 11 tumor suppressor genes and five controls in our BRAF ^V600E^- driven lung tumor models.

# Results
Adenoviral vectors and lentiviral vectors introduced in the lungs of GEMMs offer temporal control and can be titrated to achieve an optimal level of tumor numerosity. 
However, only lentiviral vectors can be used to barcode tumors because they integrate into the genome while adenoviruses do not[@pmid:19561589; @pmid:28530655].
With CRISPR/CAS9 gene editing, lentiviruses have been used to analyze many genetic interactions of oncogenic _Kras_ driven lung adenocarcinoma[@pmid:29233960;@pmid:28530655].
To enable simultaneous activation of BRAF^V600E^ and loss of tumor suppressor genes, we bred _Braf^CAT^_; _H11b^LSL-CAS9/+^_ mice. 
To determine the size of BRAF ^V600E^ tumors and the contribution of 11 tumor suppressor genes (_Trp53, Rb1, Cdkn2a, Apc, Rbm10, Stk11, Setd2, Arid1a, Atm, Keap1, Smad4)_ on BRAF ^V600E^ lung tumorigenesis, we obtained tittered barcoded-lentiviral plasmids that encode Cre-recombinase as well as a sgRNA that inactivates one of eleven tumor suppressors common in lung adenocarcinoma(Figure 2.1).
All genes tested are putative tumor suppressor genes commonly lost in human lung cancer patients. Each lentiviral solution contained ~1000 individually barcoded lentiviruses.
We infected both _LSL-Cas9_ and _CAS9_ deficient mice in order to determine the contribution of genetic manipulation on tumor size (Figure 2.1).
Mice meant to be analyzed after eight weeks received a viral titer of 1x10^5, while mice meant to be analyzed after 16 weeks received a viral titer of 1x10^4.
Gross, histologic images of experimental lungs show an increase in tumor burden with both time (Figure xxx) and CAS9 status (Figure 2.1). 
Therefore, based on macroscopic inspection, at least one tumor suppressor appeared to cooperate with BRAF ^V600E^ to increase tumor burden.
After euthanasia, lungs were collected for genomic DNA extraction and barcode amplification, followed by the preparation of sequencing libraries.
Before genomic extraction and library preparation, a known quantity of known-barcoded cells was added to benchmark sequencing reads to a known cell number.

We determined the mean size of a BRAF^V600E^ driven tumor to be 21,248 thousand cells (Figure 2.2). 
Interestingly, there is a widespread distribution of tumor sizes, with the most giant BRAF^V600E^ tumor to be ~300,000 cells, along with many small tumors (Figure).


In order to determine the fitness landscape of any one particular tumor suppressor, we calculated the relative number of tumor cells in a given tumor using the Tuba-Seq genomics pipeline. In CAS9 deficient mice, there was no statiscically significant cooperation with any single-guide RNAs (Figure 2.3A).
After eight weeks post tumor initiation, APC loss provided a growth advantage(Figure 2.3 B). 
However, 16 weeks post-initiation revealed that both SETD2 loss and APC loss cooperated with BRAF ^V600E^ to form larger tumors (Figure 2.3 C). 
APC loss was a suspected hit as we have previously shown that activation of Wnt-beta-catenin signaling promoted BRAF^V600E^ tumorigenesis. 
As APC loss is predicted to increase Beta-catenin signaling activity, this result was unsurprising to us. 
However, loss of SETD2 was a novel finding in the context of BRAF ^V600E^ lung tumorigenesis.

Given our findings of SETD2 loss increased tumor burden concurrent with BRAF^V600E^, we next validated SETD2 in a new cohort of mice with single-guide RNAs targeting SETD2 (Figure 2.4). 
Indeed, loss of SETD2 increased tumor size based on gross histological analysis(Figure 2.4A). Addiionally, tumor size increased from in reponse to CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing of _Setd2_(Figure 2.4B). 
Since SETD2 antibodies are unreliable in both western blots and immunohistochemistry, we used H3K36me3 as a surrogate marker for SETD2 activity by immunohistochemistry(Figure 2.5A). 
Whereas 90% of nuclei in BRAF ^V600E^ only tumors were H3K36me3, more than 60% of tumors of mice infected with SETD2 CRISPR virus were negative for H3K36me3(Figure 2.5B).
Furthermore, when classified by H3K36me3-positive or -negative, there is even more substantial evidence that SETD2 loss leads to larger tumor formation(Figure 2.5C). Specifically, tumors that have lost H3H36me^3^, were 5-times larger than tumors that have retained H3K36me^3^. Therefore, we conclude that _Setd2_ loss drives growth of BRAF^V600E^-driven lung tumors.

Clearly, there is a strong selective advantage given to tumors that have lost _Setd2_ function. We next wondered if human lung cancer patients have altered _SETD2_ levels. Indeed, Low _SETD2_ levels correlate with poor overall survival and _SETD2_ is expressed less in lung tumors compared to normal lung tissue(Figure 2.6A,B). To further demonstrate the relationship between BRAF^V600E^ and _SETD2_ loss, we mined patient data avaiable from Project Genie[@pmid:28572459]. Interestingly, we found an association between _SETD2_ genomic alterations and _^BRAF^V600^_ mutational activation(Figure 2.6C). Specifically, of the 220 _BRAF^V600^_ mutations (include V600E and V600K), 40% had concurrent alterations in _SETD2_. These observations indicate _SETD2_ loss is a common feature of _BRAF^V600^_-driven human lung adenocarcinomas and predicts poor overall survival in non-small cell lung cancer.



# Discussion
The mutational landscape of lung adenocarcinoma is complex due to the lifelong bombardment of DNA by carcinogens ingested into the distal lung epithelium[@pmid:23770567].
While understanding which altered genes play causal roles in tumor formation and progression is required for personalized medicine, the noisy mutation profiles in lung adenocarcinoma make it hard to do so.
However, there is a central role for the MAPK pathway during the initiation and progression of lung adenocarcinoma [@pmid:28228261].
Oncogenic BRAF^V600E^ is a significant driver of lung adenocarcinoma.
However, mouse models with activation of BRAF ^V600E^ only lead to benign tumorigenesis[@pmid:26001956; @pmid:17299132].
Although it is known that activation of WNT and PI3k signaling and loss of _Trp53_ and _Cdkn2a_ genes allow BRAF^V600E^ benign lung tumors to progress to malignant disease, it is a time-consuming and laborious process to effects individual tumor suppressors, in GEMMs.
Therefore, we sought to systematically test a variety of known tumor suppressors in lung adenocarcinoma.
Furthermore, until now, we did not know the absolute number of cells in a BRAF^V600E^ adenoma, only its area, which is confounded by tissue sectioning and stromal cell contamination.
Prior to Tuba-Seq, it was challenging to accurately determine the size of BRAF^V600E^ adenomas.
Based on population doublings and cross-sections of BRAF ^V600E^ tumors in histological sections, it is estimated that BRAF^V600E^-driven lung adenomas grow about 15-20 populations doublings and reach a size of 1mm^3^[@pmid:24589553]. 
With Tuba-Seq, we accurately discerned the absolute size of all BRAF^V600E^ lung adenomas, regardless of size.
Interestingly, our results have revealed that BRAF^V600E^-driven tumors widely differ in absolute tumor cell number. Our results support the hypothesis that each tumor-initiating cell has unique barriers to tumor outgrowth. 
This heterogeneous response to BRAF^V600E^ activation likely reflects intrinsic differences between individual cell states. 
Indeed, tumorigenic potential can vary significantly due to different cell types (AT2 vs. Club cell vs. AT1) or be influenced by subtle differences within a cell type, such as proximity to supporting stromal cells such as fibroblast or immune cells. 
Since we used a ubiquitous promoter to drive BRAF^V600E^ and CAS9 expression, not all sequence likely reads come from adenomas or tumors but from average cell turnover during tissue homeostasis. 
Therefore, in our quantification and analysis, we focused on tumors greater than 5,000 cells. 

We combined Tuba-Seq with CRISPR/CAS9 gene editing of eleven putative tumor suppressor genes with four inert control sgRNAs. We identified APC and SETD2 loss as a cooperating genetic event that allows BRAF^V600E^ tumors to grow larger. 
Therefore, APC and SETD2 are bona fide tumor suppressors in lung adenocarcinoma. 
APC loss is known to activate the Wnt-signaling pathway and is a well-established tumor suppressor in colon cancer[@pmid:1528264].
Furthermore, our lab has previously published a requirement for WNT-signaling for the progression of BRAF^V600E^ lung tumors[@pmid:24589553].
Specifically, inhibition of WNT signaling by a Porcupine inhibitor prevents tumor onset, while constitutive activation of the pathway drives tumor progression to high grade. 
Therefore, it is not surprising that APC loss cooperates with BRAF^V600E^ to induce tumor growth.

We have also identified _SETD2_ loss as a potent tumor suppressor(Figure 2).
_SETD2_ is mutated in other solid malignancies on cBioPortal, such as Kidney and bladder cancers[@pmid:22588877]. 
SETD2 is a histone methyltransferase that deposits trimethylation marks on H3K36[@pmid:33023640]. 
Chromatin modifiers use H3K36me^3^ to mark actively transcribed genes[@pmid:18157086]. 
Mining of TCGA mRNA expression and survival analysis further revealed that _SETD2_ mRNA is lower in lung adenocarcinoma and is associated with poorer overall survival(Figure 2). 
Interestingly, _SETD2_ alterations are also significantly associated with BRAF^V600E^ mutations (Figure 2).
The unique association of _BRAF^V600E^_ mutation and _SETD2_ loss may reflect an interesting synergistic effect between MAPK signaling and loss of chromatin regulation. 
One hypothesis is that SETD2 loss drives spurious transcriptional activation.  
Similarly, recent work by Monte Winslow and David Felder's labs have identified SETD2 loss as a cooperating event in KRAS-G12D lung tumorigenesis[@pmid:28202515]. 
However, the mechanism by which _SETD2_ loss drives tumor progression in either BRAF^V600E^ or KRAS-G12D remains elusive. 

Although we have identified novel tumor suppressors in BRAF^V600E^ lung tumorigenesis using Tuba-Seq, we have failed to confirm previously identified tumor suppressors _CdkN2a_ and _Trp53_ as cooperating events.
One hypothesis is that the sgRNAs targeting _Trp53_ and _Cdkn2a_ are inefficient. However, previous Tuba-Seq experiments did confirm _Trp53_ editing and even demonstrated tumorigenic cooperation with KRAS-G12D[@pmid:29610476].
Another hypothesis is that the effect size of _trp53_ loss is so tiny that many mice and tumors are needed to detect robust cooperation. 
Indeed, p53 loss is not that to suddenly make tumors immediately proliferate. 
Instead, p53 loss merely allows for tumor cells to sample various transcriptional programs that can be co-opted for increased fitness in the face of stress.
Along similar lines, perhaps 16-weeks is too little time to allow for _Trp53_ or _Cdkn2a_ deficient tumors to proliferate. 
Likely, it is a combination of small effect size, inefficient gene editing, and insufficient time that prevented us from identifying _Trp53_ as a tumor suppressor in BRAF6V600E^ driven lung tumorigenesis using Tuba-Seq combined with CRISPR/CAS9.  

Since GEMMs lack the mutational burden exhibited by human lung adenocarcinomas, they are good models to study gene-gene interactions in tumorigenesis. 
Our data provide further insight into the essential biological mechanisms for BRAF^V600E^ lung tumorigenesis.
Additional studies of SETD2's role in lung adenocarcinoma will further reveal how it alters the evolution of lung adenocarcinomas. 
Furthermore, given its striking association with _BRAF^V600E^_ mutations, it will be essential to know how _SETD2_ alters the response to BRAF^V600E^-targeted therapy. 
A complete understanding of the consequences and outcomes of genetic cooperation between BRAF^V600E^ and tumor suppressors or oncogenes will help clinicians better understand tumor evolution and paths to drug resistance. 

##Methods

**Animal Husbandry** All mice were housed in an environmentally controlled room, and all animal care and experimental procedures were approved by (and in accordance with) the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee Office of the Huntsman Cancer Institute at the University of Utah. Genetically engineered mouse breeding and genotyping was conducted as previously described [@pmid:31452510]. The _BRAF^CAT^_ and  mice were previously described [@pmid:11694875; @pmid:31452510; @pmid:17299132; @pmid:26001956]. _H11b^LSL-Cas9^_ mice were previously described[@pmid:26178787] All viruses were administered in a Biosafety Level 2+ room, as is regulated by the Institutional Biosafety Committee Guidelines. Lentivirus (Stanford University) was delivered through intratracheal intubation.

**Tuba-Seq** _Braf^CAT/+^_ and _H11b^LSL-CAS9/+^_ mice have been described[@pmid:31452510; @pmid:26178787] and maintained on a mixed background. approximetley equal numbers ofmale and female mice were used in the study. lung tumors were initiated by intratracheal intubation of lentiviral Cre vectors as previously described[@pmid:19561589]. Barcoded lentiviral vectors were supplied by Monte Winslow as previously described[@pmid:29233960]. Briefly, Lentiviral vectors that contain an eight nucleotide sequence that defines the CRISPR-targeted followed by a 15 nucleotide sequence that is unique only to each initiated tumor. Lentivirus was generated in HEK 293T cells in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS by standard lentiiral generation and titered as previously described[@pmid:29233960]. Genomic DNA was isolated from bulk lung tissue after weighing. Briefly, benchmark control cell lines were spiked-in to enable calculation of the absolute number of tumor cells from the number of barcode reads. After tissue homogenization and 12-hour proteinase-K digestion, genomic DNA isolation was extracted using standard Phenol-Chloroform and precipitated by ethanol. Suquencing libraries were prepared by PCR amlifying the sgRNA-BC sequencing in eight reactions in parallel with Q5 master mix and purified with AMPure beads and quantified with the Qubit instrument. Computational analysis was performed in house by the Monte Winslow laboratory.

**Histology and Quantification of lung tumor burden**
Lungs were perfused with neutral-buffered formalin, removed, and kept in neutral-buffered formalin for 16-24 hours and then stored in 70% ethanol prior to embedding. 5 micrometer sections were cut using the HCI histology core. sections were then stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Stained slides were scanned using the 3D-histech Panoramic MIDI slide scanner. Tumor size was quantifie using 3D Histech QuantCenter. Immunohistochemistry for H3K26me^3^ was performed as previously described at a concentration of 1:1000 with rabbit mAb #4909 from Cell Signaling Technologies. [@pmid:28089889; @pmid:31452510]. 

**Human lung cancer data** cBio Portal and Project Genie were used to calculate co-ocurring mutations with _BRAF^V600^_ mutations. KMplotter was used for survival analysis and TNMplot was used to calculate _SETD2_ expression in tumor tissue vesus normal lung tissue[@pmid:34309564; @pmid:33807717].

![**Figure 2.1. Overview of Tuba-Seq experimentation** (A) Lenti-sgRNA-Cre plasmid library with collection of targeted tumor supressors. (B) _Braf^CAT/+^_ and _Braf^CAT/+^;H11b^LSL-Cas9/+^_ were infected with either 10^4^ (16 week _Braf^CAT/+^; H11b^LSL-Cas9/+^_) or 10^5^ (8 weeks _Braf^CAT/+^; H11b^LSL-Cas9/+^_ and 16 weeks _Braf^CAT/+^; H11b^LSL-Cas9/+^_) (B) Representative gross images of experimental mouse lungs.](images/tuba1.png){#fig:04 .white width="100%"}

![**Figure 2.2. Jitter plot of calculated tumor cell number based on Tuba-Seq pipeline.** Tumor size corresponds to dot size. Mean tumor number for 16 weeks _Braf^CAT/+^; H11b^+/+^_ is 21,248 cells. Mean tumor number for 8 weeks _Braf^CAT/+^; H11b^LSL-Cas9/+^_ is 9,095 cells. Mean tumor number for 16 week _Braf^CAT/+^; H11b^LSL-Cas9/+^_ is 29,867 cells.  ](images/tuba2.png){#fig:05 .white width="100%"}

![**Figure 2.3. Jitter plot of calculated tumor cell number based on Tuba-Seq pipeline seperated by sgID.** (A) 16 weeks _Braf^CAT/+^; H11b^+/+^_(negative control) has no apparent cooperative genetic events. (B) 8 weeks _Braf^CAT/+^; H11b^LSL-Cas9/+^_ identifed Apc loss as a cooperating genetic event based on increase in tumor cell number (C) 16 week _Braf^CAT/+^; H11b^LSL-Cas9/+^_ identified Apc and Setd2 loss as cooperating events.](images/tuba3.png){#fig:06 .white width="100%"}  
  
![**Figure 2.4. Validation of _Setd2_ loss as cooperating genetic event in BRAF^V600E^ lung cancer.** (A) Representative images of lung tumor histology of 16 weeks _Braf^CAT/+^; H11b^LSL-Cas9/+^_ mice infected with 2.5x10^4^ PFU Lenti-sgSetd2-Cre or Lenti-sgNT1-Cre. (B) Quantification of tumor size based on histology, n= 30 tumors. * = _p-value<.05.](images/tuba4.png){#fig:07 .white width="100%"}

![**Figure 2.5. H3K36me^3^ is lost in larger tumors in _Set2d_-edited lung tumors.**(A) Representative images of H3K36me3 (surrogate for _setd2_ loss) depicting either "high" or "low" staining indicative of protein expression. (B) Quantification of H3K36me^3^ positive tumors in either _sgSetd2_ or _sgNT1_ targeted mice. *= _p-value<.05_ for negative tumors. (C) Quantification of tumor size paired with H3K36me^3^ negative tumors. Tumor size and H3K36me^3^ positivty were simuletaneously measured using QuantCenter and binned in either "low" or "High" and then average tumor size was determined for each group. *= _p-value<.05_.](images/tuba5.png){#fig:08 .white width="100%"}

![**Figure 2.6. _SETD2_ loss is common in human cancers, an indicator of poor prognosis and frequently occurs with _BRAF^V600E^_ mutations.**(A) Survival analysis with "KMplotter"" indicates a trend towards poorer overall survival with low _SETD2_ mRNA in TGCA Lung adenocarcinoma dataset. (B) _SETD2_ mRNA is attenuated in Lung adenocarcinoma compared to normal lung tissue (C) _SETD2_ mutations significantly co-occur with BRAF^V600E^ mutations and are present in 40% of _BRAF^V600E^) mutant Lung Adenocarcinoma.](images/tuba6.png){#fig:09 .white width="100%"}

