## Chapter Four {.page_break_before}


## Introduction
history of scRNA seq
cell types of lung tumorigenesis
tumor heterogenity
response to D+T

The mammalian lung is a vast and intricate labyrinth that is responsible that is responsible for gas exchange between air and body through a meshwork of endothelial cells. The lung organ system begins with a single airway that branches in a geometric and stereotypic pattern[@pmid:18463632]. These many thousands of branches lead to the business end of gas exchange, the lung alveoli. The alveoli are comprised of two specialized cell types: Alveolar Type 1 (AT1) cells comprise most of the surface area of the lung and are thin squamous cells that mediate oxygen exchange across cell membranes. Alveolar Type 2 (AT2) cells, however, are cuboidal that secrete surfactant proteins that aide in preventing the delicate alveoli from collapsing. 

Pathology of the alveoli is a steadfast threat to an organism's life due to the importance of gas exchange. Diseases such as lung adenocarcinoma, pulmonary fibrosis, and emphysema are the most common dysfunctions of the distal lung epithelium[@pmid:24499815]. Lung adenocarcinoma is also the most common type of human lung cancers in both men and women. A large body of literature has suggested that lung adenocarcinomas arise in the alveolar and are descendants of AT2 cells [@pmid:32747478; @pmid:11751630]. Therefore, there is great interest in understanding how AT2 cells develop, maintain cell identity, as well as how they renew themselves during aging or in response to injury [@pmid:24739965; @pmid:24879355; @pmid:24879355; @pmid:32669714].

Recent advances in profiling of single-cell transcriptomes during homeostasis conditions and diseases states have greatly improved our understanding of AT2 cell, and lung adenocarcinoma cell biology[@pmid:32707077; @pmid:32707078; @pmid:24739965].Single-cell profiling of human lung cancers have revealed the drastic intra-tumoral heterogeneity that exists in a single tumor[@pmid:22397650; @pmid:27757846]. Since transcriptional heterogeneity can be considered a source of therapeutic resistance, there is great interest in understanding the evolution of lung adenocarcinoma and how it changes with response to pathway targeted therapy[@pmid:32822576].Since GEMMs are an important pre-clinical model for testing out potential therapeutic strategies for lung adenocarcinoma, it is important to understand single-cell heterogeneity in popular GEMM models. 

Although GEMMs are a great way to model human lung adenocarcinomas, there are several drawbacks worth mentioning. Human lung adenocarcinomas typically develop from a single tumor-initiating cell and is a consequence of an accumulation of mutations in certain cell types and a weakened immune system across a lifetime.  In GEMMs, tumorigenesis is often initiated in many cells at once and is the consequence of an engineered mutation. In contrast to human lung adenocarcinomas that have a high mutational burden, murine lung adenocarcinomas do not have a high mutational burden and instead display high copy number variation[@pmid:25363767]. Therefore, we set out to profile the single-cell transcriptomes of various BRAF^V600E^-driven lung cancer GEMMs in order to determine genotype-specific heterogeneity and response to pathway-targeted therapy.

## Results
Adenoviral vectors and lentiviral vectors introduced in the lungs of GEMMs offer temporal control and can be titrated to acheive an optimal level of tumor numerosity. However, only lentiviral vectors can be used to barcode tumors because they integrate into the genome while adenoviruses do not[@pmid:19561589; @pmid:28530655].

## Discussion
talk about the batch effects
talk about the times
similarity to other studies with KRAS
talk about homogenous response to D+T




