## Chapter Six: Future Perspectives {.page_break_before}


This work's general purpose was to understand better how BRAF^V600E^ tumors form and progress to lung adenocarcinoma. Our strategy was (1) to determine additional tumor suppressor genes in BRAF^V600E^ lung tumorigenesis, (2) to evaluate the effects of different mutant-p53 alleles, and (3)  to profile the tumor cell heterogeneity using scRNA-seq. To achieve these goals, we heavily relied on genetically engineered mouse models of B_BRAF^V600E^ lung tumors to characterize and compare the contribution of candidate-based tumor suppressors. This chapter will examine the exciting possibilities that arose due to our work.

Every year in the United States, approximately 4000 patients succumb to _BRAF_-mutant lung cancer. Unlike melanoma or thyroid cancer, _BRAF^V600E^_ is not the most common _BRAF_ alteration. Less potent MAPK activating mutations such as _BRAF^G469A_ are more common[@omid:30770389; @pmid:31533235]. It is likely that less potent MAPK activators serve as support signaling molecules for oncogenes like _KRAS(G12D)_, which fine-tune pathway activation. However, little is known about how vital non-V600E _BRAF_ mutations are in the evolution of lung adenocarcinoma. Therefore, preclinical models such as genetically engineered mice will be vital to determine the role of non-_BRAF^V600E^_ mutations in lung adenocarcinoma. Previous work from our lab has established that _BRAF^V600E^_ plays a substantial role in the early formation of lung benign lung tumors but fails to form lung adenocarcinoma. Rather, benign to malignant lung cancer progression depends on additional genetic alterations[@pmid:24019382]. 

The mechanisms by which the mutationally activated MAPK-pathway promotes lung tumorigenesis remain incompletely understood. However, recent work suggests that the levels of MAPK-pathway activation correlate with tumor initiation and progression[@pmid:21107428; @pmid:28228261]. Therefore, there must be secondary events after mutational activation of KRAS or BRAF that alter the tone of the MAPK pathway. Recent work has highlighted potential mechanisms tumor cells adapt to increase pathway activation. Amplification of the KRAS locus occurs during early murine tumorigenesis initiated by KRAS-G12D[@pmid:21807965]. During late tumorigenesis, MAPK-pathway hyperactivation can occur through loss of DUSP6 regulation by NKX2-1[@pmid:34689179]. However, NKX2-1 loss is also known to affect tumor cell identity and is associated with dedifferentiation[@pmid:33821796; @pmid:30332632]; @pmid:23523371]. For increased MAPK pathway activation to drive tumor progression, p53 function needs to be inhibited. Therefore, there are two main barriers to tumor progression in lung adenocarcinoma: (1) MAPK pathway activation and (2) subversion of p53-mediated tumor suppression. 

We initially hypothesized that the barrier to tumor progression was the initiation of oncogene-induced senescence. Previous studies have linked oncogenic MAPK signaling to p53-mediated tumor supression[@pmid:9271435; @pmid:9765202]. One hypothesis is that MAPK pathway activation crescendos during tumorigenesis until p19/ARF expression is induced, which triggers p53 activation and tumor suppressor. However, it is unclear if p53 needs to be silenced, as work from our lab and others have provided evidence that WNT signaling is also a barrier[@pmid:24589553; @pmid:28489818]. Whether increased WNT-signaling can overcome p53-induction remains to be understood. However, it is clear that p53 suppression and MAPK activation are both frequent events in human cancers and cooperate to form malignant lung adenocarcinoma in mice. Therefore, more research is needed to determine the precise mechanisms governing p53 tumor suppression and tumor progression.

The diversity of p53 mutations in human cancers is unlike other tumor suppressor genes. Whereas mutations in tumor suppressors APC, RB, and BRCA1, are inactivated thru aberrant stop-codons or gene deletion events, mutations in p53 are often missense mutations in the DNA-binding domain[@pmid:27503997]. Although mutational inactivation of p53 is important for _BRAF^V600E^_ driven lung tumor progression, common p53 alterations have not been tested for cooperating with BRAF^V600E^. Instead, null alleles of p53 have been studied. This is undoubtedly due to the poor design of hotspot mutants of p53, such as p53-R175H, p53-R273H, and p53-R248W. These alleles of mutant p53 are designed to be null for p53 prior to recombination, and mice harboring these alleles are prone to developing cancers that have nothing to do with MAPK activation in the lung epithelium. Therefore, we utilized the recently generation wild-type-to-mutant p53 alleles _TRp53^R172H^_ and _Trp53^R245W^_ (_Tp53^R175H^_ and _Tp53^R248W^_ in humans)[@pmid:30262850]. Part of this work has been dedicated to characterizing the effect of _Trp53^fl/fl^_, _Trp53^R172H^_, and _Trp53^R245W^_ on _Braf^V600E^_ lung tumorigenesis. Strong evidence and careful characterization of mutant-p53 alleles have determined that not all p53-mutations are created equal. We have shown that p53^R172H^ and p53^245W^ differentially alter BRAF^V600E^ tumor progression. The mechanism by which p53-missense mutants abrogate tumor suppression is two-fold. Mutant-p53 inactivates wild-type p53 through acting as a dominant-negative[@pmid:15060172]. More controversial is the ability of mutant-p53 to exert gain-of-function effects. Our studies failed to determine a molecular explanation as to why P53^R172H^ and P53^R245W^ are more potent drivers of cancer growth and drug resistance. However, we did determine that cell lines derived from mouse lung tumors have altered transcriptional profiles. Recently, evidence has emerged suggesting aneuploidy is a common event in mutant-p53 cells[@pmid:34465782]. Specifically, copy number alterations were more common in mutant-p53 cells than in p53-null cells in an isogenic study[@pmid:34465782]. Therefore, the phenotypic diversity underlying many p53 gain-of-function studies could reflect inherent genomic instability imparted by p53-mutations. This idea could help explain our data, as loss of mutant-p53 had no apparent phenotype in mutant-p53 cells. Therefore, it is of great interest to determine the copy number variation in our various p53-mutant models.

This dissertation support previous studies that found gain-of-function effects imparted by mutant-p53[@pmid:27836911]. However, the field of mutant-p53 gain-of-function is still murky with controversy. In the future, it is essential to resolve our understanding of mutant-p53 proteins and how they influence the properties of cancer cells. We believe the diversity of mutant-p53 mechanisms can be explained by complex interactions between tumor types and each mutant-p53. Therefore, careful analysis of each p53-mutant in each cancer type might be required. Therefore, we propose to combine Tuba-Seq with CRISPR/CAS9-mediated homology-directed repair to determine the fitness landscape of every p53 mutation possible, similar to what has been performed with _Kras_ in lung cancer and more recently in colorectal cancer [@pmid:32792368; @pmid:33608386]. This will allow for the unbiased quantification of the growth advantage imparted by individual p53-mutants in a single animal.

Our studies also shed insight into p53 stability in BRAF^V600E^ lung cancer. We have observed that mutant-p53 accumulation correlates with p19/ARF, consistent with previously published research[@pmid:21107427; @pmid:21107428]. Therefore, p19/ARF may play a dichotomous role in tumor development. In the context of wild-type p53, p19/ARF might play a tumor-suppressive role in response to overactive MAPK signaling. In mutant-p53 expressing tumors, p19/ARF can stabilize mutant-p53, potentiating cancer progression. In order to fully understand p53 tumor suppression and mutant-p53 dominant-negative effects, we propose to study p19/ARF-specific deletion in the context of wild-type and mutant p53 in BRAF^V600E^ tumorigenesis. Since the _CDKN2A_ locus encodes p19/ARF, it is difficult to determine the effect of p19-specific roles in genetically-engineered mice. However, one could still test the role of p19/ARF in mutant-p53 stabilization _in vivo_ and _in vitro_ using p19/ARF specific RNA-interference such as siRNAs or short-hairpin RNAs.

**Pathway Targeted Therapy**

Resistance is inevitable to pathway-targeted therapy. Drug resistance is a consequence of complex tumor heterogeneity that drives tumor evolution. Interestingly, it has been suggested that the baseline mutation rate of tumor cells is high enough that in a sufficiently large tumor, all possible single nucleotide variants have likely occured[@pmid:8962135; @pmid:31778175.]  Furthermore, the more prolonged the therapy, the more likely that resistant cells can propagate and fuel tumor growth after an initial tumor regression. In terms of MAPK-pathway inhibition in melanoma and lung cancer, many resistance mechanisms have been identified[@pmid:32822576; @pmid:23524406]. Not surprisingly, many resistance mechanisms involved reactivation of the MAPK by mutational activation of upstream or downstream regulators[@pmid:24550319; @pmid:23524406; @pmid:24957944]. Our work has provided evidence that p53-mutations can alter responses to pathway-targeted therapy.
Our data indicate that _Trp53_-mutant cell lines have greater basal MAPK pathway activation. Moreover, the MAPK pathway is still active in response to MAPK targeted therapy. Therefore, we hypothesize that mutant-p53 can alter MAPK pathway activity to drive therapeutic resistance. However, we have yet to determine a mechanism to explain how mutant-p53 alters MAPK signaling. Thus, understanding the molecular mechanisms governing mutant-p53 cell biology and biochemistry is warranted.
  
  Currently, p53 mutational status is not a contraindicator of MAPK targeted therapy in _BRAF^V600E^_ mutant lung cancer[@pmid:30631578]. Patients are often stratified into wild-type or mutant p53 during diagnosis. However, Our data suggest that there are substantial differences between p53-mutants regarding tumor progression and therapeutic resistance. There are complex gene-gene interactions at play that affect therapeutic resistance. Therefore, careful analysis of cooperating genomic events' contribution to pathway-targeted therapy needs to be tested in preclinical models.

Since reactivation of the MAPK is a common mechanism of dabrafenib plus trametinib resistance,  further vertical inhibition of the pathway is considered an attractive therapeutic strategy. Previous research has shown that triple combination (BRAFi+MEKi+ERKi) imposes a more substantial threshold for pathway reactivation and subsequent resistance[@pmid:28714990]. Although more effective at tumor regression and evasion of resistance, vertical inhibition undoubtedly causes severe side effects that can not be tolerated. Therefore, more combination strategies are likely required. Fortunately, exciting therapeutic strategies are emerging from our lab that appears to be efficacious in MAPK-driven tumors, such as the combination of MAPK-pathway inhibitors and autophagy inhibition[@pmid:34298710; @pmid:30833748; @pmid:32933997].

In parallel to my efforts to characterize three p53-mutations in BRAF^V600E^ lung cancer, we determined the contribution of a broad range of tumor suppressor proteins to tumor progression. Our work has highlighted the role SETD2 plays in suppressing lung tumorigenesis. However, we currently do not understand the mechanism behind SETD2 tumor suppression. One hypothesis is that SETD2 prevents spurious gene transcription. Thus when SETD2 function is lost, tumor cells adopt multiple cell states due to altered gene expression. The more cell states a tumor cell can access increases the odds of adopting pro-growth characteristics best for the tumor environment. In order to test this hypothesis, we can profile the transcriptomes of single cells that have intact SETD2 and SETD2 deficient tumor cells. Importantly, we must consider alternative transcriptional start sites and alternative splicing. Since p53 dysregulation is at the heart of tumor progression, we would like to know if SETD2 affects p53-stability and target-gene expression. Alternatively, SETD2 loss might circumvent p53 activation through some undescribed mechanism. 

Overall, lung adenocarcinoma is a disease that is characterized by a high mutational burden that results in mutational activation of the MAPK pathway and tumorigenesis. Large-scale genomic studies have provided great insight into the molecular underpinning of lung adenocarcinoma. However, due to the complex interactions between gene products, the future of personalized medicine still relies on rigorous testing in preclinical models like genetically-engineered mice. These efforts of this work will aid in the ultimate understanding of cooperating genetic events in lung adenocarcinoma. Ultimately, this dissertation has helped answer several questions regarding BRAF^V600E^ tumorigenesis and cooperating events for tumor progression. Additionally, this work has also generated new questions that need to be answered to fully understand how BRAF^V600E^ and p53 mutations cooperate to form deadly lung cancers.